It's hard to believe today that Byron Katie was a woman
with such low self-esteem that she slept on the floor,
feeling she didn't even deserve to sleep in a bed.
But with one small switch of the mind,
she was set on a path of self inquiry
that not only healed her life,
but the lives of thousands of others.
Today she lectures and teaches on the subject of inquiring
as to whether our thoughts and feelings
we experience are true or just a program
we keep running to our own detriment.
Our time with Katie was cut short
due to some nervousness among the conference organizers,
and you will hear voices increasing in the background
as the conference center was filling up.
That said, our time with her was both delightful
and her words profound; Enjoy.
(light and slow drumming with sitar music)
A lot of people on our site are involved
in the greatest heights of the mystery
of the new connection between the quantum field
and consciousness and on.
And when it comes right down to it,
perhaps the most complex subject
we actually have to deal with as human beings
is the subject of our love and inter-connectivity
to each other and what a clear and beautiful
job you do in deciphering what this means.
There had to have been a defining moment in your life.
What happened?
You know, actually, there was.
I was very depressed for more than a decade,
agoraphobic, extremely paranoid, very suicidal.
And, in fact my self esteem was so low
I used to sleep on the floor.
I didn't believe I even deserved a bed.
And, one morning as I lay sleeping on the floor,
actually a cockroach (laughs) crawled over my foot.
I opened my eyes, you know, I was just startled awake.
In that moment, it has changed my life,
and thousands and thousands, maybe millions of lives.
What happened when
that cockroach crawled over you?
I saw in that moment that when I believed my thoughts
I suffered, but when I questioned my thoughts
I didn't suffer, and I've come to see
that this is true for every human being.
So that's what my life is about.
Your communication
on this subject is so incredibly clear.
And it's not that it's simple, but it's not easy.
Is that a correct way to say it?
Well, it's for people who are willing
to take a look at themselves.
For some people they find The Work so much fun.
I call it The Work: the four questions and turnaround.
It's so much fun, because it's entering the world
of ourselves, and it's a universe
that we haven't really tapped.
We think we have, but for me, it's entering heaven.
I've come to see that earth is heaven.
All I've done is question my stressful thoughts.
Anything, any thought, that would lead me to believe
that you are less than I am, that you are not equal
in some way, or that I was not equal in some way to you.
That thought needs to be questioned.
Those thoughts need to be questions.
It kind of levels that field, and I've come to see
that in our thought systems, I am you and you are me.
People who experience The Work come to see for themselves
that there are no new stressful thoughts.
Very true.
There just aren't any, and as long as we're stuck in them,
you know, they're fear based and they're separating.
As long as we're stuck in these thoughts,
believing these thoughts, then we're just not free.
And you wrote very eloquently in the book,
talking about the simplest thing.
If you're afraid to be alone, if you're afraid
to come home and not turn on the television or the radio,
then you're simply afraid of your own thoughts.
Exactly so.
If I can just add
one more thing for you to elucidate on.
If those are you're thoughts and you're observing them
and listening to them, then who are you?
Can you talk about that whole thing
that we all go through, these loops in our head?
Well the loops in our head,
this is a fascinating science.
The science of coming to know ourself.
But, if I have the thought, "Look at him. He's unkind."
In that moment, I feel it.
My whole physical can change, if I believe that thought.
In that moment, it's how unkind of me to see him as unkind.
And then turned around, I see I'm unkind
to see him that way, and where is it that I'm unkind?
And then I begin to look at him again
and the opposite, you know these turnarounds
are what I'm working with, it's a part of The Work.
He is unkind turned around he is kind.
And then my vision immediately begins
to come out of denial and see this man
or this person's life for what it is.
So the real barometer
is how your own thoughts are making you feel.
Absolutely, if I see you as anything
less than beautiful, I've come to see that
there's no mistake in the universe,
that there absolutely is not
It's not the world that is the problem;
it's what we're believing about the world
that is the problem, and when we question that
the world becomes a beautiful place.
Paradise, actually.
When you get into work
like Bruce Lipton, for example The Biology of Belief.
It actually affects the way our own bodies
can heal...
Yes.
It affects our expression
in the world...
It does.
And it's cultural
Yes.
It's familial.
We do it to ourselves...
Yes.
by our own experience,
so the line of inquiry has to go pretty deep.
Especially when you get to romantic love.
Can we talk about that? I love the name of your book.
Yes.
I Need Your Love: Is That True? (laughs)
Yes, yes.
Can you talk about
what we get ourselves embroiled in?
Well, if I want to impress you,
then I have to imagine what would impress you.
And then, I have to become that person
that I believe will impress you.
So it's like, she would like me to say this,
or she might like me to do that,
or she might like me to smile.
This is an internal process for some people.
It's going on all the time.
So, I want you to care about me,
so I begin to perform.
I become a facade.
Then, when you say, "Oh I really like her. She's wonderful."
or you say, "Katie, I really like you.
"You're such a wonderful person."
then I cannot believe you, because the person
you're liking doesn't exist.
It's one that I have concocted in my belief system
of what you would appreciate and admire.
So, I'd like to say if I had a prayer it would be this:
God, spare me from the desire to seek
love approval or appreciation. Amen.
(laughs) Yes.
And it leaves me as my authentic self.
When you say, "I care about you. I think you're wonderful."
I can own it 100%,
because I haven't attempted
to manipulate your mind.
Right, so how does life feel
at that point when you decide you're no longer
manipulating people...
Authentic.
to like you?
What is it we're afraid of?
What is it we feel we have to risk in being authentic?
We're afraid, you know, if we look at the self talk,
some people will have thoughts like
"I'm not enough. There's something wrong with me.
"I did it wrong." and we're so full of this guilt and shame,
we think if we're ourself that people will see us
the way we believe that they'll see us,
which is not living up to their expectations
and really it's our expectations.
What about the whole
if you love me you'll do what I want game?
It's simply, what I like to say is:
Personalities don't love, they want something.
We equate that with love; getting and having and giving.
We equate that as love, and I've come to see that it's not.
I like to say that...
I used to say my name is Yes.
(Interviewer laughs)
Because someone would ask me
a question or for something and I would say yes.
And that's a yes to me, it feels right.
But, when my integrity says no,
this integrity is what I answer to inside me,
because I'm who I live with.
So, when it's honest, I say no.
And that no, is a yes to me.
So, I'm not dealing with pleasing people.
I'm dealing with my own authenticity.
At first, it can be hard for people
to step into that honest place, because they believe
they'll lose friendships, the love of their children,
the love of their spouses and partners,
and it's a very fearful thing.
It's like if I'm really authentic, people won't like me.
But, I invite everyone to question that also,
until you love who you're with.
What happens when, say you're with someone
whether it be family, friends, husband, wife,
where you have certain preferences for example.
These are your preferences.
Yes.
And you just simply in a sense,
don't match each other's preference list
when you start stripping away the need to be approved of.
How does one then begin dealing with that?
What's that end up feeling like too?
Let's say my preference, and I live this everyday,
and my husband does also, but let's say
my preference is to go to a movie.
And his preference is to go for a walk.
He says, "I want to walk.", and I say,
"Well, I would like to go to a movie."
Now, he's free to take his walk, and I'm free
to go to the movie, because it has nothing to do with love.
It has to do with preferences.
He understands it's not because I don't love him
that I'm not walking with him.
And we both understand the same thing.
Now, if he says, "I want you to go for a walk with me.
"It's very very important to me."
So, I open my mind and I think well why not?
Right.
Why not?
There's no mistake; I can't do it wrong.
So, what would I learn on this walk?
A whole world opens up, so when I'm taking the walk,
I enter, someone I love, I enter their world.
I get to see what it is about the walk that they love,
what it is about the walk I love.
But, if my mind is at the movie,
or how he convinced me, it's very important
for me to understand that he did not
manipulate me to take that walk.
That I made the decision.
And this is really critical,
to not succumb to manipulation,
but rather really truly make your choices
and live with those choices.
Yes, yes.
And that's where the power comes from.
Yes, it's like his preference became my preference.
For whatever reason, I own it. I own it.
He did not make me do it.
Like if someone says, "Katie, touch your nose."
And I touch it, I can't say they made me do it.
I made the decision.
So, the truth is when you take
your own power back to say yes to yourself,
yes to be honest with what you truly desire,
what you need, who you are, what you are,
doesn't that give you power then
to really accept others in the world more unconditionally?
I mean truly.
Absolutely.
Absolutely, we can only project our thoughts onto people.
Everything is our projection.
Every thing, everyone, every situation.
And if we don't love those people in situations,
then that's where I invite people to question
their thoughts about those situations and people,
and to wake themselves up to a world
that is indescribably kind.
I have one quick question.
For a woman who was afraid of sleeping in a bed
because you didn't deserve one, you're about to pack
this convention center, and we can hear the people
in the background streaming in right now.
One quick question, and I know it's not quick,
but if you can bullet points and then they can buy the book,
what are the five keys to freedom and love?
Okay, you know, what I would love to do
is talk about five things?
Yeah.
Okay, the four questions and the turnaround.
I love that people know what these are...
Okay.
And they're on my website,
you don't have to remember them.
They're always there on the home page free.
The first one, and we put these up against a belief
that something that is stressful for us,
like "He doesn't care about me", "She doesn't care about me"
for example, or "I'm not enough."
But, the first question is: Is it true?
The second question is:
Can you absolutely know that it's true?
The third question is: How do you react
when you believe that thought?
What happens when you believe that?
Yeah, how does that feel and where does the mind travel?
How do you treat yourself and other people
when you believe that thought?
How do you react when you believe the thought?
If it's badly, then you need to examine
that thought. (laughs)
Yes, if it's stressful.
Then the fourth question is:
Who would you be without that thought?
Right.
Who would you be?
You can take it back later, but be still
and answer the question.
To be still with all four of these questions.
And then, as we did with the unkind man example,
I invite people to turn the thought around
and find opposites, and see if they're as true or truer.
Find examples so that you can step into
what is authentically yours.
Katie, thank you so much.
I could talk to you for days, but we don't have
the time to do that, so I'll encourage everybody
to read your book, and also, I know you have some
fabulous connections coming up
with PBS and some other things.
You really are changing the lives of millions,
and thank you for your time.
You're so welcome. It's a privilege.
(light and slow drumming)
There's little doubt that this kind
of self inquiry is justified in much
of what we do and experience in our lives.
Katie's books are available by clicking
on the link below if you would like to know more.
Now, for those of you already ready to take a look
at your thoughts and communication,
you can also turn to the work of Robert Tennyson Stevens,
who is a master in the arena of the spoken word
and its impact on our lives.
You can see interview here on CMN as well.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(light and slow drumming with sitar music)